---
layout: meeting
title: "Tree-Width Extraction"
speaker: Chun Kit Lam and Glenn Sun
---

This weeks presentation will feature two talks on the topic of extraction based on a measure called tree-width. 

### Fast and Optimal Extraction for Sparse Equality Graphs


**Abstract**:
Equality graphs (e-graphs) are used to compactly represent equivalence classes
of terms in symbolic reasoning systems. Beyond their original roots in automated
theorem proving, e-graphs have been used in a variety of applications. They have
become particularly important as the key ingredient in the popular technique of
equality saturation, which has notable applications in compiler optimization,
program synthesis, program verification, and symbolic execution, among others.
In a typical equality saturation workflow, an e-graph is used to store a large
number of equalities that are generated by local rewrites during a saturation
phase, after which an optimal term is extracted from the e-graph as the output
of the technique. However, despite its crucial role in equality saturation,
e-graph extraction has received relatively little attention in the literature,
which we seek to start addressing in this paper. Extraction is a challenging
problem and is notably known to be NP-hard in general, so current equality
saturation tools rely either on slow optimal extraction algorithms based on
integer linear programming (ILP) or on heuristics that may not always produce
the optimal result. In fact, in this paper, we show that e-graph extraction is
hard to approximate within any constant ratio. Thus, any such heuristic will
produce wildly suboptimal results in the worst case. Fortunately, we show that
the problem becomes tractable when the e-graph is sparse, which is the case in
many practical applications. We present a novel parameterized algorithm for
extracting optimal terms from e-graphs with low treewidth, a measure of how
“tree-like” a graph is, and prove its correctness. We also present an efficient
Rust implementation of our algorithm and evaluate it against ILP on a number of
benchmarks extracted from the Cranelift benchmark suite, a real-world compiler
optimization library based on equality saturation. Our algorithm optimally
extracts e-graphs with treewidths of up to 10 in a fraction of the time taken by
ILP. These results suggest that our algorithm can be a valuable tool for
equality saturation users who need to extract optimal terms from sparse
e-graphs.

Based on an [OOPSLA 2024](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3689801) paper.

**Bio**:
Chun Kit Lam is a student of the TACO lab and ALPACAS group at HKUST. He is
interested in programming language design, static analysis and graph algorithms.

### E-graphs and Circuits

**Abstract**: This talk explores the connection between e-graphs and circuits, which allows us to adapt certain algorithms from established research on circuits, such as a tree decomposition-based algorithm for extraction. Additionally, we experimentally note that e-graphs appearing in practice can typically be substantially simplified, and many such simplification rules are more naturally stated in the language of circuits.

**Bio**: Glenn Sun is a 2nd year PhD student at the University of Washington, advised by Paul Beame. He is broadly interested in proof systems and proof complexity.

